Education
A lot of people think about going back to school after they leave 
prison. Going to school helps you learn more about the world. It 
can also help you meet new people and get better jobs. 
This chapter has information about: 
-> ABE and GED Programs 
-> Vocational Training and Apprenticeships
-> College
-> Paying for College
It is never too late to learn or go to school or college. Learning can even make you feel happier and more fulfilled. 
You can go to school part-time or full-time. If you are still in prison, take classes before you leave.
Education
ABE, GED and High School 
Equivalency Programs
Adult Basic Education (ABE) programs can help you 
get better at reading, writing, math, listening, and 
speaking. Usually, you can find ABE programs at 
adult schools, career centers, libraries, and community 
colleges. They are free or cost only a little. For-profit 
agencies like Kaplan and ELS Language Centers also 
offer ABE, but they charge more money. 
ABE programs can also help you learn English or 
prepare for the GED. A list of ABE programs in Illinois 
can be found at www.ilcco.net/AdultEd/index1.cfm. 
The General Education Development (GED) test is like a 
high school diploma. If you did not graduate from high 
school, you can take this test and it will count on your 
resume as a diploma. The test will have questions about 
things you would learn in high school. A GED or high 
school diploma is a requirement for many jobs. If you 
don’t have your GED, you should try to get one. 
You can register online to take the GED test at ged.
com. You will probably take the test on a computer at an 
official GED testing site. 
The GED is not an easy test. You will probably need to 
study. A lot of places have free preparation programs 
that can help you get ready:
-> Community colleges
-> Adult learning centers
-> Online study programs
-> American Job Centers
A lot of programs will let you sign up at any time. They 
can also give you a study plan to help you get better in 
harder subjects. For more info see 
study.com/illinois_ged.html
Vocational Training and 
Apprenticeships
Vocational programs help you learn how to do a job. 
They can teach you things like welding, car repair, 
plumbing and more. You can go to community 
and technical colleges, as well as trade schools to 
take vocational classes. Some community-based 
organizations also offer vocational training. 
A lot of prisons have vocational classes. Take them 
if you can. Vocational classes help you get some 
experience and see if you like the work. Once you leave, 
you can get an entry-level position or an apprenticeship.
Do you need help learning how to 
use new technology? Go to Northstar at 
digitalliteracyassessment.org to get help. They have online 
classes and in-person ones at different locations. They will 
give you certificates when you gain new skills.

After You Get Out
Apprenticeships help you get training and experience. 
You’ll also get paid through an apprenticeship. 
Apprenticeships are usually offered through trade 
unions. 
Visit the Illinois WorkNet website to find a vocational 
program: illinoisworknet.com. The Illinois American Job 
Center is another good place to look: usa.gov/find-a-job
For more information on apprenticeship programs 
in Illinois, go to https://www.illinoisworknet.com/
ApprenticeshipIL/Pages/default.aspx.
“Consider seeking simple certifications, 
like CDL, sanitation, limo driver, or 
forklift.” 
—Earl W.
Degree Type Information
Vocational certificates Certificates that prepare you for specific jobs or tasks. Offered by 
community colleges, technical schools, or workforce programs.
Associate degree 2-year degree granted by a community college, university, or technical 
school.
Bachelor’s degree 4-year degree granted by a college or university.
Master’s degree 2+ years, after earning a bachelor’s degree. Typically requires research.
Doctor of Philosophy (PhD) 4+ years, after earning a bachelor’s or master’s degree. The highest 
academic degree to earn.
Professional degrees (MD, JD, MBA) Degrees required to practice in certain professions (doctors, lawyers, 
business), after earning a bachelor’s degree.
6 6
College
Community college
If you haven’t been in school for a while, you might want 
to start at community college. Community colleges are 
inexpensive and offer many different classes. A lot of them 
offer programs where you can get a GED and college 
credit at the same time. Community colleges usually offer 
associate degrees, certificate programs, and workforce 
training. 
4-year college
Many people who want to earn a 4-year Bachelor’s degree 
start by attending community college for a year. Then they 
transfer to a 4-year college to finish. You’ll save money for 
the first two years because community college costs less 
than 4-year schools. 
You have to earn a certain number of credits to get a 
4-year college degree. Some credits must be in general 
subjects like science, math, and history. If you finish 
these credits at a community college and then transfer 
to a school that offers a 4-year degree, your credits can 
transfer over too. Make sure to check that your new school 
will count your transfer credits. 
Check out the website of the Illinois Community College 
Board for information about planning for college, paying 
for college, and picking a college. Visit it at http://www2.
iccb.org/iccb/. To learn more, visit the websites of the 
schools you’re interested in, or you can call, email, or visit 
an admissions counselor or academic advisor at these 
schools. 
Where should you apply?
Deciding where to go may take some time. Think about 
what kind of degree you want and what kind of college 
you want to go to. Research colleges online or at the 
local library. Almost all colleges have websites where 
you can learn about their price, academic programs, 
non-academic activities, the town where they are 
located, and many other things.
Applying for College
Step 1: Get the application
For almost all colleges, you will apply on their websites. 
If you need help with this a librarian at a public library 
will likely be able to help you.
Step 2: Gather your information
To apply for college, you will probably need:
-> Your Social Security number.
-> A state driver’s license or identification card.
-> The dates of high school and previous college attendance.
-> Unopened transcripts from high school, GED, and/or 
college transcripts, whichever you completed most recently.
-> Many four-year colleges will also ask for ACT or SAT 
test scores. 
Some applications may ask about your criminal history. 
If you tell them you have been convicted of a felony, 
some schools will ask for more information. Just 
because they are asking for the information doesn’t 
mean you will be rejected, but different schools have 
different policies about backgrounds. You can also ask 
to speak with an admissions counselor about this.
Step 3: Take the SAT or ACT exam
Is this your first time applying for college? Many fouryear colleges require you to take the ACT or SAT college 
entrance exam. An admissions counselor can give you 
more information. It helps to study. You can buy study 
guides or get them from your public library. Khan 
Academy offers online SAT test prep for free at https://
www.khanacademy.org/sat
Step 4: Complete the essay
Most four-year colleges require a “statement of 
purpose” essay. This might be the hardest part of the 
application, but these essays let you shine. Make sure 
you put your goals in the essay. Ask a few people you 
trust to check your statement for mistakes. Ask them to 
also make sure you sound purposeful and confident. 
Step 5: Submit the application
You’ll probably hear from a community college within 
a few weeks. They’ll let you know by phone or letter 
if you’ve been accepted. Four-year colleges can take 
longer. If you have questions, contact the school’s 
admissions office.

After You Get Out
Paying for your education can be hard. Below we describe 
how you can get money for college.
Free Tuition Programs
Some colleges offer free tuition if you meet certain income 
requirements. Many community colleges in Illinois offer free 
tuition and a stipend through the Workforce Equity Initiative. 
Learn more at lllinoiswei.org. The University of Illinois offers 
free tuition for in-state students whose family income is less 
than $67,100 through the Illinois Commitment program, see 
admissions.illinois.edu/commitment. Veterans can also get 
money for college. See studentaid.gov/understand-aid/types/
military.
Even if you have tuition covered, you’ll need to pay for 
living expenses, books, and fees. 
Financial Aid: FAFSA
Do you need financial aid for college? The Free Application 
for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) is the place to start.
How do I apply?
You can find the FAFSA online at www.fafsa.gov, or you 
can request a paper copy from 800-4-FEDAID (800- 433-
3243). Applying for federal student aid is free. But it can 
be complicated. If you’re worried or have questions, ask 
for help. College financial aid offices can help you over the 
phone or email or in person. 
When is it due?
Check on the form to see when it is due for your state. You 
should also ask your college when it is due. They might 
want it much earlier. Look at the school’s website or call 
the financial aid office. Turn in your FAFSA as soon as 
you can because some financial aid runs out fast. If you 
can, turn in your FAFSA while you’re in prison. That way 
everything will be ready in time for you to start school. 
What kind of aid will I get?
The aid you get will depend on how much money you 
make and the cost of your school. Your aid package may 
include the following:
-> Pell Grants are government grants that are based 
on financial need. You do not have to pay them back.
-> Scholarships can come from the college or from 
other organizations. Ask your financial aid office 
about scholarships. Scholarship information can also 
be found at public libraries and online.
-> Loans are not free. You will have to pay them back. 
Loans from the government have a lower interest 
rate than banks, and you won’t have to start paying 
it back until after you graduate. Think carefully how 
you will repay your loans. Your loans will impact your 
decisions about money and jobs.
-> Work study positions allow you to pay for 
college by working for the school. You can say you 
are interested in work-study when you fill out the 
FAFSA. Work-study is a good way to make money 
and get more work experience. They are often 
offered first come, first served. 
Your financial aid package may include several kinds of 
aid. You don’t have to accept the whole package. You 
can choose the parts that work for you. For example, 
you could accept a grant but not a loan. Reach out to the 
office if you have questions or want help understanding 
your package.
Can I get federal student aid if I have a criminal record?
In most cases, yes. There are two exceptions. You 
cannot get federal student aid if you were subject to an 
involuntary civil commitment after completing a period 
of incarceration for a forcible or non-forcible sexual 
offense.
For more information on financial aid for those with a 
felony conviction, see studentaid.gov/understand-aid/
eligibility/requirements/criminal-convictions. It would 
also be helpful to speak with a financial aid officer at 
the schools you are applying to.
If a grant, loan, or scholarship offer sounds too good to 
be true, it probably is. There are many for-profit companies 
that take advantage of people who are looking to go to 
college. Applying for financial aid should be free, and you 
should research the agency or company before applying.
Remember to keep copies of all applications and related 
paperwork in a safe space.
Paying for Your Education 
6 8
EJP Scholarships
The Education Justice Project (the creator of this 
guide) has a scholarship program. All our scholarships 
are need-based, meaning they go to people who need 
financial help. You can use them for school costs 
(tuition, books, fees) at accredited postsecondary 
schools. The deadline for application is usually in 
November each year.
EJP offers:
-> One $1000 scholarship to a family member of an 
EJP student. 
-> One $1000 scholarship to a family member of an 
IDOC or IDJJ staff person. 
-> One $1000 scholarship to a family member of an 
incarcerated individual.
-> Two $1000 scholarships to individuals who have been 
released from an IDOC adult facility. 
-> One $1000 scholarship to an individual who has been 
incarcerated in an IDJJ juvenile facility. 
We also offer scholarships to formerly incarcerated 
individuals who have been deported to Mexico or who 
were incarcerated in Mexico. Applications for these are 
due in March of each year. These scholarships provide 
support for study in Mexico:
-> One $10,000 MXN scholarship to an individual who 
was formerly incarcerated in Mexico. 
-> One $10,000 MXN scholarship to an individual who 
was incarcerated in the US and deported to Mexico, 
or to a member of their immediate family.
For more information about how to apply for an EJP 
scholarship, please contact scholarships@educationjustice.net.
Defaulted student loans
If you have outstanding student loans that are currently 
in default, this will impact your eligibility for financial 
aid. Being in bad standing with old loans can be 
overwhelming, but you have options! You can even begin 
exploring these options while you are incarcerated. Your 
first priority will be to get out of default. You may not 
need to pay off the entire loan or even make a large 
payment. You may be able to rehabilitate or consolidate 
your loans at little to no cost—sometimes $5/month 
in order to get back in good standing. You can do this 
online, by phone, or by mail. See https://studentaid.gov/
manage-loans/default/get-out
The Formerly Incarcerated College Graduates 
Network is an amazing resource! Build community, find 
support from peers, share resources, find job openings, 
advocate for policy change and share your story. Visit: 
www.ficgn.org
Other Resources for College 
Students
Tutoring centers
Do you need extra help with your classes? A lot of people do. 
Many college campuses offer free tutoring to their students. 
Mentoring and student support programs
Some colleges offer mentoring programs to new 
students. College mentors are other students or people 
who give support to new students. 
Career center
Most colleges have career centers that can help you find 
a job while you are in school and when you graduate. 
Career centers also offer help with resumé writing, 
getting ready for interviews, and more. 