HEALTH

When you leave prison, you will need to manage your 
own health. This can be a welcome change, but it is also 
stressful. There are many different options for health 
insurance. There are many different kinds of clinics, hospitals, 
and doctors to choose from. There are paperwork, applications, 
and bills to figure out. Don’t be afraid to ask for help from family 
and friends as you explore your options. 
In this section, we cover: 
• Staying healthy during COVID-19
• Health insurance
• Regular and specialty doctor visits 
• Dental and vision insurance
• Paying for medications
• HIV prevention, testing and treatment 
See also our Trauma and Mental Health chapter and Substance Use Disorder chapter.
Health
Staying Healthy During 
COVID-19
At the time of this publication, the COVID-19 pandemic 
was still disrupting life. US deaths from COVID-19 have 
reached over one million people. There are now new 
variants of the virus that spread more easily and quickly, 
though most are less serious. 
Here are the most important things to keep yourself and 
others healthy: 
1. Get a vaccine and booster shots. Even if you aren’t at 
high risk, a vaccine will protect you and those around 
you. The vaccines have been tested on thousands of 
people. They are safe and effective at preventing 
serious COVID-19 infection and hospitalization. 
You should get a vaccine even if you already have 
had COVID-19. You can get a free vaccine at most 
pharmacies. If you are eligible for another dose or a 
booster shot, get them! They will help keep you safe. 
2. Wear a mask when you are around large groups of 
people, especially indoors. 
3. Pay attention to infection levels. If a lot of people are 
getting sick, it’s good to be more cautious.
4. Isolate if you are sick or have been around someone 
who is sick. 
5. Wash your hands often. 
If you get sick
COVID-19 can look like a lot of different illnesses. The 
most common symptoms are fever, cough, and shortness 
of breath. You might feel tired or achy. You might vomit 
or have diarrhea. Some people show no symptoms while 
others become very sick and end up in the hospital on a 
ventilator. 
If you have mild symptoms, you can treat the virus at 
home. Rest, drink plenty of water, take acetaminophen 
(Tylenol) for fever, drink a warm tea with honey for a 
cough, and stay away from others as much as possible 
while contagious. 

Emergency Warning Signs
Do you have trouble breathing, pain or pressure 
in the chest, or confusion? Are you too sleepy for 
someone to wake you? Go to a hospital emergency 
room right away or call 9-1-1. If you’re not sure if 
you should go, call your health provider or a health 
clinic.
COVID testing. You can order free at-home 
COVID-19 tests at covidtests.gov. It’s a good idea 
to have a few tests on hand. If you think you might 
have COVID, call 2-1-1. No-cost testing is available 
nationwide at health centers and select pharmacies.


“Go to a community medical center. You 
can get a free full physical when you get 
out of prison. We have to make sure there 
are no underlying conditions that we 
aren’t aware of.” 
—Joe Joe

Health Insurance
Getting medical care is costly! Health insurance can 
help pay for doctor’s visits, medications, vaccines, 
laboratory tests, and emergencies. Health insurance can 
also be expensive, but medical care can cost hundreds or 
thousands of dollars if you are not insured.
These community clinics provide:
• Vaccinations and immunizations.
• Full physicals.
• Nutrition and food stamp programs. 
• STD screening, cancer screening, and HIV/AIDS 
services. 
• Dental care.
• Pregnancy and maternity assistance. 
• Programs to quit smoking.
• Hearing tests and eye exams.
Find a public health program or clinic at 
www.illinoisfreeclinics.org. Our directory lists many of 
these clinics.
Ways to Get Health Insurance
There are several different ways to get health insurance. 
Here is a list of the most common ways:
• Government health insurance: Medicare and 
Medicaid are government health insurance programs 
for certain populations. For more information, see 
below.
• Employer health insurance: Some employers 
offer health insurance plans for their employees. The 
employer might cover some of the cost, and the rest 
will be taken out of the employee’s paycheck.
• Student health insurance: If you’re a full-time 
college student, you may be able to purchase health 
insurance through your college or university.
• Through a parent: People who are age 26 or 
younger and have a parent with health insurance 
are allowed to be added to their coverage as a 
dependent.
• Healthcare Marketplace: Created by the 
Affordable Care Act, the Marketplace offers health 
plans for purchase, and the cost may be discounted 
depending on your income. 
• Through a private agent: You might be able to 
purchase personal health insurance directly from the 
company or through an insurance agent. 

Getting care if you are uninsured. If you don’t 
have health insurance but need care, there are public 
and community health programs and clinics all over 
Illinois that offer free or low-cost services.

Medicaid and Medicare
Medicaid and Medicare are federal programs that offer 
assistance with healthcare costs. Most hospitals and 
health clinics accept Medicaid payments.
• Medicaid: Program for people who meet income 
requirements.
• Medicare: Program for those 65 years old or older. 
To see if you qualify, visit www.healthcare.gov
You can apply to Medicaid or Medicare one of four ways: 
1. You may be able to apply in prison before you leave. 
Talk to your counselor or clinical services. 
2. Apply online at Illinois’ Application for Benefits 
Eligibility (ABE) page: abe.illinois.gov
3. Apply in person at a hospital, health clinic, or DHS 
Family Community Resource Center. You can find 
the nearest center by going online to: https://www.
dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx?module=12
4. Apply by mail or fax. You can call DHS to mail you 
an application by calling (800) 843-6154 (TTY 
(800) 447-6404). Complete the application and 
mail or fax it back to the nearest Family Community 
Resource Center. 
Before applying, you need to have a few documents 
ready:
• Income verification. This could be pay stubs, a 
financial aid award letter, a written statement from 
your employer, or a copy of your check stub showing 
your total income before taxes. If you haven’t been 
working because you have been incarcerated, you can 
show your Verification of Incarceration document. 
• Your Social Security number. 
• Proof of residency—any official document that 
shows your address and name together will work. 
When you fill out your Medicaid application, you 
can also apply for other benefits, such as SNAP 
(Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program) and 
TANF (Temporary Assistance for Needy Families). 
See Resources to Meet your Basic Needs for more 
information about these and other assistance programs.
If you are receiving Medicaid or benefits from any of these 
other programs, report any changes to your income or 
dependent status as soon as possible. If you begin making 
more money than is allowed, you may no longer qualify 
for these programs. You will start to lose parts of your tax 
refund on a monthly basis. You can report changes through 
the ABE system, by visiting a Department of Human 
Services Family Community Resource Center, or by calling 
the Department of Human Services during normal business 
hours at (800) 720-4166.
Health Insurance Vocabulary
When thinking about getting health insurance, it helps to 
know the vocabulary. Ask questions and make sure you 
understand what you are getting.
• Premiums. The amount you pay for your health 
insurance every month. 
• Yearly deductible. The amount you pay for 
covered health care services before your insurance 
plan starts to pay. With a $2,000 deductible, 
for example, you pay the first $2,000 of covered 
services yourself. Many plans cover the costs 
for certain services, like a checkup or disease 
management programs, before you’ve met your 
deductible.
• Copay. A fixed amount ($20, for example) you pay 
for a covered health care service after you’ve paid 
your deductible.
• Coinsurance. The percentage of costs of a health 
care service that you pay (20% for example) after 
you’ve paid your deductible. In this example the 
insurance plan would pay the other 80%.
• Out-of-pocket maximum. The most you have to 
pay for covered services in a plan year. After you 
spend this amount on deductibles, co-payments, and 
coinsurance for in-network care and services, your 
health plan pays 100%
• Approved network or in-network. The facilities, 
providers and suppliers your health insurer has 
contracted with.
• Out-of-network. Health care providers who don’t 
contract with your health insurance or plan. Out-ofnetwork costs are usually higher than in-network. 

These definitions and more can be found at: www.
healthcare.gov/glossary/

“You have to be in charge of everything 
yourself. You’re not going to get called in 
later for a physical. The onus falls on you. ” 
—Pablo

Dental and Vision Care
Get your teeth cleaned and examined. Oral health is 
important for your overall health. Teeth problems can 
lead to bigger health problems in the future. 
Get your eyes checked regularly, too. If you have vision 
problems like glaucoma, cataracts, or retinal tears, it is 
especially important to take care of your eyes.
Dental Insurance and Vision Insurance
You may be interested in a healthcare plan that covers 
dental or eye care. Some dentists will accept Medicaid 
payments—ask them to find out. Dental and vision are 
not always included in health insurance plans, so think 
about your needs and check each plan before you enroll. 
There may be separate dental or vision plans that you 
can get. 
Some health insurance plans offer vision care, which 
covers yearly eye exams and some of the cost of glasses 
and contacts. Check your health insurance plan to see 
what is covered because you may have to buy a separate 
plan for eye care. Medicare does cover eye exams, and 
Medicaid covers vision care for children. 
Low Cost Dental and Eye Care
Here are some options for dental care:
• Go to https://www.nidcr.nih.gov/health-info/findingdental-care to find low cost dental care.
• Find a dental school in your area by visiting this 
website: www.ada.org/en/coda/find-a-program
Dental students, under the supervision of 
professionals, can do dental work for a lower cost 
while gaining experience. 
There are several programs that offer free or low cost 
eye exams and glasses:
• VISION USA (eye exams) - (800) 766-4466 
• Walmart and Target have stores with eye shops 
where you can get an exam and glasses at a discount. 
• Eyecare America (eye exams) - www.aao.org/
eyecare-america
• InfantSEE (free eye exams for babies 6-12 mo.) - 
www.infantsee.org
• Sight for Students (glasses for children) - (888) 290-
4964 
• New Eyes (free glasses program) - (973) 376-4903 
• Purchasing glasses online for cheap: Zennioptical.
com and www.goggles4u.com offer frames starting 
at around $10. However, you will need a prescription.
 Doctor Visits 
It’s a good idea to establish a regular relationship with your doctor. Most health insurance plans require you to pick 
a primary care provider. This person will serve as your “medical home” and is usually a family physician, nurse 
practitioner, physician’s assistant, or internal medicine physician. Having regular visits with a primary care provider 
is the best way to manage your health. Go see this person instead of going to the emergency room or urgent care. 
This will save you money and time and keep you healthy. 
A primary care physician can give you a full physical exam, perform lab work, and provide prescription renewals. It 
is recommended that you have a full physical at least once a year and complete routine exams. Below are age and 
sex-based recommendations for health screenings. 

Routine Exams That Can Keep You Healthy

Age 
18-39
Men:
Blood pressure, cholesterol, flu shot, syphilis 
screen, TDAP shot, HPV shot, chlamydia/
gonorrhea, HIV, skin exam
Women:
Blood pressure, cholesterol, flu shot, TDAP 
shot, HPV shot, breast exam, after 21 PAP 
test, chlamydia/gonorrhea, HIV, skin exam

40-64
Men:
Blood pressure, blood sugar, colonoscopy 
(over 50), stool test, flu shot, shingles shot 
(over 60), prostate screen (over 50), lung 
cancer screen (only if you smoke), skin exam
Women:
Blood pressure, blood sugar, colonoscopy 
(over 50), stool test, flu shot, shingles shot 
(over 60), breast screen, mammogram (over 
40), lung cancer screen (only if you smoke), 
postmenopausal bone screening, PAP test, 
pelvic, HPV, skin exam

65+
Men:
Blood pressure, blood sugar, cholesterol, 
colonoscopy until 75, hearing test, aneurysm 
screen (if smoker), prostate and lung 
screening (only if you have risk factors), 
pneumonia shot x2, skin exam
Women:
Blood pressure, blood sugar, cholesterol, 
colonoscopy until 75, hearing test, 
mammogram until 75, bone screening, PAP 
test until 65, pneumonia shot x2, skin exam

Your primary care provider can also refer you to 
specialists for some health concerns. One way to contact 
your primary care physician is by signing up through 
your hospital network’s online portal. This will allow you 
to access your medical records, send messages to your 
doctor, and schedule appointments.

“Going to the office of my primary care 
physician was actually a pleasant experience. 
It was nothing like it was on the inside.” 
—Pablo

Pharmacy 
Some insurance plans will help you pay for expensive 
medical prescriptions, while others do not. If you are having 
trouble paying for your prescriptions, here are a few options: 
• Ask your doctor or pharmacist if there is a generic 
version of the drugs you need. Generic drugs are 
much less expensive. 
• Go to Goodrx.com to compare prices of prescription 
medications. It tells you where you can go for 
the best price. You can download their app on a 
smartphone. 
• Stores like Target, Walmart, Costco, and Sam’s Club 
often have special programs where you can purchase 
generic drugs for very cheap ($4 for 30-day quantity 
or $10 for a 90-day quantity). 
• Go to www.rxassist.org to find out if the medication 
you need is offered for free to people who qualify. 
HIV/AIDS and Other Diseases
Being in prison increases the risk of getting some 
diseases. After being released from prison, consider 
getting tested for HIV, Hepatitis C (HCV), Hepatitis B 
(HBV), and tuberculosis. HIV, HBV, and HCV can be 
detected by a blood test. Tuberculosis can be tested by 
blood or by a skin test; if these tests are positive, the 
disease is confirmed by a chest X-ray. Locations for 
HIV testing can be found by using the CDC’s HIV Test 
Locator at: https://www.cdc.gov/std/hiv
If you test positive for HIV or another serious disease, 
know that you can still live a long and meaningful life. 
You should make an appointment to see a healthcare 
provider to stay healthy and possibly begin treatments.

You should still be cautious if the test comes back 
negative. It is possible that the tests cannot yet detect 
the virus in your body. You can request another test at a 
later date. 
What Does Having HIV 
Mean?
HIV is a virus that spreads by attacking and killing 
healthy cells in the body. This happens all over the body, 
destroying cells or forcing them to create new infected 
cells. 
HIV targets immune system cells, known as T-cells. 
T-cells fight off infection by killing cells that have been 
infected by germs. As more T-cells start dying, the 
immune system is open to attack. If the number of T-cells 
drops too low, the risk of infection increases and can 
lead to AIDS. When someone has AIDS, their immune 
system becomes too weak to fight off other infections. If 
untreated, people can die of AIDS. 
Fortunately, people who have HIV today can live long 
and productive lives as long as they take steps to stay on 
top of their infection. HIV can be managed with daily 
medication, regular testing and doctor visits, and healthy 
lifestyle changes (exercise, stopping smoking, getting 
enough sleep, etc.). 
Sometimes HIV testing is offered as part of the prison 
outtake process. We suggest you take advantage of this 
free testing, as knowing your status is very important to 
you and our loved ones.
Risk
The most common way for HIV to be transmitted is 
through sexual contact, but infected and untreated 
mothers can pass it on to their children. Avoid contact 
with blood, semen, or vaginal fluid of sexual partners who 
are HIV-positive. Do not share needles or syringes and 
make sure to use protection (condoms) for any sexual 
contact. 
Know the risk of spreading HIV to a sexual partner who 
is not HIV positive. Being treated with antiretroviral 
medications can reduce your chances of transmitting HIV 
to a partner. Taking antiretroviral medications regularly 
lowers the levels of HIV in your blood. This does not mean 
that the virus is completely gone, so take precautions 
and use condoms even though the risk of transmission is 
low. If you do not have HIV but are in a relationship with 
someone who does, you can take PrEP (Pre-Exposure 
Prophylaxis), which reduces the risk of being infected. 
There are also certain sexual activities that can increase 
your chances of transmitting HIV. For more information 
about HIV transmission and risk factors, visit: www.hiv.
gov/hiv-basics
Reflect
1. What are my health insurance options?
2. Who is my health point of contact--the doctor or nurse practitioner who I can call if I need help?
3. What are some ways I can stay healthy?

“Make sure that there’s not something 
wrong with you that they didn’t test for or 
detect while you were inside. When I first 
got home, they ran all these tests. I got 
called a few days later asking if I could 
come in again to see the doctor. When I 
came in, she went over the results, and 
she said, it doesn’t look bad but you have 
chronic kidney disease. She wrote me a 
referral to go see a kidney specialist and she 
gave me some literature to read about the 
disease and how I could have gotten it.” 
—Shaun W.