Trauma and Mental Health

Know that if you are struggling with trauma or mental health 
issues, you are not alone. Most people who are incarcerated have 
experienced trauma. Many also have a mental health issue or have 
had one in the past. Being in prison can cause mental health issues 
or make existing mental health issues worse. Your time in prison may 
cause trauma that affects your mental health long after you leave. 
If you have mental health issues, seek treatment as soon as you are released. Reentry is 
hard. Trauma and mental health issues can make reentry much harder. Sadly, people who do not get treatment are 
more likely to return to prison. 
There are mental health professionals who can help you. They can provide talk therapy and medication, if needed. They 
can help you learn to better handle stress and life problems. 
You matter! Make your mental health a priority. When you do, you will experience deep personal growth and be able to 
better help others. You can learn to become stronger so that you can bounce back from hard things. 
This chapter covers the following topics:
• Trauma
• Bouncing back
• Treatment for mental health 
• Types of treatment
• Attitudes about mental health
• Common mental health disorders 

“Trauma is something that all of us go through. You have to get to the point that you 
realize that what you’ve been going through is trauma. Nothing you went through is 
normal. It’s not normal to be secluded. Even before prison, we were on the streets, 
experiencing trauma and violence to the point that it became a natural thing. We 
became desensitized to those things. We didn’t think, ‘Oh wow, this is abnormal.”
—Anonymous
“The residue of prison stays with you. Keys rattling means it’s a guard coming. You wake 
up with a heightened sense of alertness. You are late and you worry you have missed 
your chance. You can’t calm down. You have a pattern of sleeplessness. You are easily 
annoyed. Tense situations escalate into violence.”
—Kilroy
Trauma
Just about everyone who has been to prison has 
experienced trauma. Trauma is a mental health issue 
that many people face. 
Trauma is the emotional response you have to a 
stressful and possibly life-changing event. It can also 
be the result of toxic stress that builds up over time. 
Trauma is more common than people think, and 
its effects can be very serious. Traumatic events in 
childhood can have effects throughout your life. 

Trauma can come from lots of things, such as:
• Physical, sexual, or emotional abuse
• Neglect
• Witnessing violence
• Having a loved one with substance use or 
 mental health issues
• Parent separation or divorce
• Poverty
• Being incarcerated or having a family member 
 who is incarcerated
• Living in unsafe neighborhoods
People in prison, especially women, are more likely to 
have experienced trauma. There are strong connections 
between trauma, poor mental health, and incarceration.
Where to get help. 
If you have experienced trauma at any point in your 
life, you may benefit from treatment or counseling. 
Counselors can help you understand the effects of 
trauma on your well-being, your emotions, and your 
behaviors. 
Trauma-focused treatments provide you with skills to 
better understand what happened to you. You can learn 
to cope with the emotions and memories connected to 
these scary experiences. The goal is to help you reach 
a healthier new perspective on what took place in your 
life. 
Here are a few places you can go for help:
• Go to this directory to find a mental health provider: 
https://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx?item=43695. 
When calling to set up an appointment, ask if they 
provide trauma-focused treatment. 
• Your primary care provider may be able to connect 
you to a mental health consultant located in your 
clinic, so ask if one is available.
• Many reentry programs provide trauma-informed 
care. Ask what services they provide.
Bouncing Back
When you face trauma or stress and overcome it, you 
can strengthen your ability to bounce back from hard 
things. Being able to bounce back instead of getting 
stuck is called resilience. 
Being resilient does not mean that stress is not hard for 
you. It means you have taught yourself to better cope 
with hard things. Resilience can be learned. It is not a 
trait that only some people have. It is something that 
everyone has the ability to strengthen, like when you 
build muscle. It takes time and work but it can be done. 
There is hope!
If you feel stuck or are not making progress, seek help 
from a mental health professional. Seeking help is an 
important part of building resilience. 
According to the American Psychological Association, 
there are four main areas of resilience. Work to improve 
your resilience in these four areas.
1. Build connections
Connect with people you trust and who understand 
you. Remind yourself that you are not alone. If you 
have experienced trauma, it is common to want to 
isolate yourself. Fight that urge. Find a group to join 
and get active in the community.
2. Foster wellness
Take care of your body. Your body needs food, sleep, 
water, and exercise to fight off stress. When you 
take care of your body, you will feel better. There is 
a big connection between your physical and mental 
health.
Practice mindfulness. Mindfulness is being in the 
present moment without judgment. It can be practiced 
in many ways. See our Mindfulness chapter to learn 
more about mindfulness.
Avoid negative outlets. When things are stressful, it is 
tempting to want to turn to drugs, alcohol, or other 
negative ways of coping. This is like putting a BandAid on a large wound. Instead, try to focus on healthy 
things you can give your body to help you cope.
“In prison I had ways to cope with trauma. 
I would exercise, draw. This allowed me to 
escape that mental state for a little while.” 
—Anonymous
“Having a support group provides you with a 
reminder that there are other ways to cope.” 
—Kilroy

 Caring for Your Mental Health 
3. Find purpose
Help others. Find meaning and purpose by helping 
others. Get involved with a community organization or 
help a friend who is struggling.
Be proactive. Ask yourself, “What can I do about this 
problem?” Set achievable goals and break them down 
into smaller steps. Start working on these steps. 
Look for opportunities for self-discovery. Self-awareness 
can help you grow. Think about how you have grown as 
a result of a struggle, like being incarcerated. How have 
you become a better person? You may find that thinking 
about your growth helps you increase self-worth and 
appreciate your path in life.
4. Embrace healthy thoughts
Keep things in perspective. You do not always have 
control of events in your life. But you do have control 
of how you make sense of things and respond to them. 
How you think about your situation impacts how you 
feel. Recognize that negative thoughts are just that, 
thoughts that can be acknowledged and set aside.
Accept change. Being able to accept change is a part of 
life. There may be some things that get in the way of your 
goals. It is ok to accept some things. Focus instead on the 
things that are in your power to change and control. 
Maintain a hopeful outlook. It is not realistic to be 
positive all the time. Allow yourself to feel upset for a 
little bit, but then focus on what gives you hope. What 
do you want and how can you make that happen?
Learn from your past. Look back at what has helped 
you in the past during hard times. Remind yourself of 
what has helped you find strength before. What have 
you learned about yourself from your past experiences?

“Advice for socializing outside? Learning coping skills and anger management. 
Being less abrasive and open-minded.”
—Earl W

Caring for Your Mental Health 
3. Find purpose
Help others. Find meaning and purpose by helping 
others. Get involved with a community organization or 
help a friend who is struggling.
Be proactive. Ask yourself, “What can I do about this 
problem?” Set achievable goals and break them down 
into smaller steps. Start working on these steps. 
Look for opportunities for self-discovery. Self-awareness 
can help you grow. Think about how you have grown as 
a result of a struggle, like being incarcerated. How have 
you become a better person? You may find that thinking 
about your growth helps you increase self-worth and 
appreciate your path in life.
4. Embrace healthy thoughts
Keep things in perspective. You do not always have 
control of events in your life. But you do have control 
of how you make sense of things and respond to them. 
How you think about your situation impacts how you 
feel. Recognize that negative thoughts are just that, 
thoughts that can be acknowledged and set aside.
Accept change. Being able to accept change is a part of 
life. There may be some things that get in the way of your 
goals. It is ok to accept some things. Focus instead on the 
things that are in your power to change and control. 
Maintain a hopeful outlook. It is not realistic to be 
positive all the time. Allow yourself to feel upset for a 
little bit, but then focus on what gives you hope. What 
do you want and how can you make that happen?
Learn from your past. Look back at what has helped 
you in the past during hard times. Remind yourself of 
what has helped you find strength before. What have 
you learned about yourself from your past experiences?
“Advice for socializing outside? Learning coping skills and anger management. 
Being less abrasive and open-minded.”
—Earl W.
Reflect
1. What has helped you “bounce back” from hard things in the past?
2. What are some things you would like to try to strengthen your resilience muscles? 
Seeking Treatment for Your 
Mental Health
Everyone can benefit from mental health support 
during reentry. Reentry is stressful. Even if you do not 
have mental health issues, you may benefit from talking 
to someone for a mental health check-up to help you 
adjust.
It is a good idea to schedule an appointment with a 
mental health provider before your release. Many
7 8
community mental health centers have long waiting lists, 
so set up an appointment ahead of time. This will help 
you have the support you need when things are tough. 
There are several different options for care, depending 
on what your needs are. 
Crisis Care
Are you in a crisis? Are you worried about hurting 
yourself or others? Do you have suicidal thoughts? 
Are you seeing and hearing things that aren’t there? 
Are your symptoms so bad that you are having trouble 
functioning? Get help right away. 
If you are in crisis, you may need an emergency 
evaluation to see if you need to be hospitalized. The 
types of treatments you get during a crisis are very brief. 
They are meant to keep you safe and get you stable. 
You’ll get connected to on-going treatment for when you 
leave the hospital. Be sure to follow up with a mental 
health professional in your community after a crisis. 
Here are a few places you can turn to:
• National Suicide and Crisis Lifeline: Call 988 
or go to 988lifeline.org to get help and chat with 
someone.
• Crisis Text Line: Text “HELLO” to 741741, 
available 24/7
• Illinois Crisis Respite Directory: https://www.dhs.
state.il.us/page.aspx?item=126349
• Crisis/emergency mental health partners/
providers Illinois directory: https://www.dhs.
state.il.us/page.aspx?item=30893
• Illinois Crisis and Referral Entry Service 
(CARES) line: Call (800) 345-9049 (some 
restrictions apply for adults)
• Call 911 and ask for a C.I.T. (Crisis Intervention 
Trained) officer if you or someone you know is in 
immediate danger, or go to the nearest emergency 
room.
Non-Crisis Care
If you need help, but it’s not an emergency, find a 
community provider for treatment. When you call, 
ask for a mental health assessment or intake with a 
therapist or counselor (for talk therapy), or psychiatrist 
or psychiatric nurse practitioner (for medication). 
These resources will help you find a community provider 
near you: 
• Director of mental health care providers 
in Illinois: https://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.
aspx?item=43695
• Your primary care provider may be able to 
connect you to a mental health consultant located in 
your clinic, so ask if one is available.
• Treatment Referral Helpline: Call (800) 662-
HELP (4357) Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration 
• Illinois Warm Line: Call (866) 359-7953 for 
mental health and substance use support by phone 
Mon-Fri, 8am-8pm
• Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator: 
https://findtreatment.samhsa.gov
Who Provides Services?
There are different mental health professionals who can 
make a diagnosis and provide treatment. 
• Counselors, Social Workers, and Family 
Therapists offer assessment, diagnosis, and 
treatment of mental health issues through talk 
therapy or counseling. 
• Clinical Psychologists diagnose and treat mental 
health issues through talk therapy. They also can also 
offer testing of behaviors, emotions, and thoughts. 
This testing can be helpful for making a diagnosis. 
• Psychiatrists or psychiatric nurse practitioners
also assess, diagnose, and treat mental health issues, 
but they take a medical approach and can prescribe 
medications. 
Most mental health professionals have different 
specialties. If you are able, find someone who has 
training and experience working with the problems you 
face.

Types of Treatment
Mental health professionals offer many types of 
treatment. Often, it’s helpful to combine different types of 
treatment, like therapy and medication. 
The most important part of treatment is not the 
type of treatment you choose but the relationship 
you have with your mental health provider. Make 
sure that you feel safe and connected to your provider so 
that you can benefit from treatment. If you do not feel 
safe and connected seek out alternative care.
Individual therapy or counseling. Talk therapy involves 
working one-on-one with a mental health professional. 
Therapy can help you heal, grow, and move toward a 
more productive and healthy life. A therapist will help you 
learn to live your best life with mental health issues. 
Group therapy or counseling. This is similar to 
individual treatment, but you will do therapy with other 
people. These are not self-help groups. A mental health 
professional will lead the group. You will likely attend 
weekly sessions. The power of group treatment comes 
from the group members. It can be really helpful to have 
a support network of others who have similar challenges. 
Many groups target a specific problem, but some may be 
more general.
Family therapy or counseling. The goal of family therapy 
is to improve relationships and resolve conflicts. It can 
include your romantic partner, children, and other family 
members. It is often used with other types of treatments. 
Medication. Just as medication can treat heart disease 
and diabetes, medication can treat mental health issues. 
Medications are not always needed, but most people with 
moderate to severe mental health issues benefit from 
medication.
Some mental health issues are significant enough to 
require medication. Bipolar disorder and schizophrenia 
symptoms cannot be managed without the help of 
medication. If you have these disorders, make sure you 
take your medication every day. Don’t skip doses. If you 
have severe anxiety or depression, you will also likely 
benefit from medication. Taking medication can help 
relieve symptoms so that you feel better. Combined with 
talk therapy, medication can help you lead a healthy and 
productive life. 
Medications are prescribed by a psychiatrist or 
psychiatric nurse practitioner after an evaluation. The 
evaluation will last between 30 and 60 minutes. After 
that, appointments will be brief (about 15 minutes). 
Your psychiatrist will monitor your medications and 
side effects. It takes time for your body to adjust to 
medications. It also takes time for your provider to find 
what works best for you. Many medications have side 
effects, especially when you first take them. Don’t give 
up if the first medication isn’t for you. It may take a 
couple of tries to find the right medicine and dosage. 
Warning: Don’t quit taking medication once you 
start feeling better. Feeling good may be a sign that 
the medication is working, not that you don’t need it 
anymore! Always consult with a psychiatric practitioner 
before stopping your medications. Stopping medications 
all at once can be very dangerous. Your psychiatrist can 
help you decide if it’s ok to stop. They can help you stop 
gradually and safely. 
“Many conflicts arise because your family 
has no idea what you’ve gone through 
in prison. Or they don’t understand your 
diagnosis. Families need a guide for what it’s 
like for those of us who have been through 
prison, who have experienced trauma.” 
—Kilroy
“I benefited a lot from [my support group]. 
Everybody in those meetings had a similar 
experience. We are at a place now where we 
can reflect on some of the things we went 
through. Maturity comes with age. They have 
been part of my unofficial therapy.” 
—Anonymous
8 0
Attitudes About Mental 
Health
Some people feel embarrassed or ashamed of having 
mental health issues. These attitudes may have come 
from your family, your community, or from the media. 
These attitudes can make it hard for you to get better.
Everyone has a role to fight against these negative 
attitudes! The National Alliance on Mental Illness (NAMI) 
offers some suggestions about what you can do to help:
• Compare physical and mental illness. Lots of people 
have mental health issues, just as lots of people have 
physical health issues like diabetes and heart disease. 
Getting treatment is a positive thing. 
• Talk openly about mental health. Share your 
experience with people you trust.
• Educate yourself and others. Respond to negative 
comments by sharing facts and experiences.
• Be conscious of language. Remind people that words 
matter. Try to avoid words like crazy or maddening
that are all too common in our daily language. 
• Show compassion for those with mental health 
issues, including yourself.
• Be honest about treatment. Getting mental health 
treatment is normal, just like other health care 
treatment.
• Choose empowerment over shame.
Reflect
1. What negative attitudes do you have about mental 
health issues and treatment? 
2. Where do these negative attitudes come from?
3. What are some things you can do to fight these 
negative attitudes?
Paying for Treatment. Medicaid will cover 
mental health treatment. If you need to apply for 
Medicaid, the Health chapter tells you how you 
can apply for Medicaid. Not all mental health 
treatment programs accept Medicaid. Make sure to 
ask if the program accepts Medicaid when you call 
to make your first appointment. Some programs 
will also offer services on a “sliding fee scale” so 
you can pay what you can afford if you do not have 
insurance. Keep in mind that most programs that 
do accept Medicaid may have long waiting lists, so 
plan ahead. If possible, make your appointments 
before your release. 
If you are enrolling in private insurance, make 
sure to select a plan that includes mental health 
treatment. When you make an appointment, ask 
if they accept your insurance. You may be able 
to see a mental health professional in private 
practice. This may decrease your waiting time for 
an appointment.
“In prison, people tend to mock those who go 
through a mental health episode. Everyone 
knows who’s taking pills. You condition 
yourself to not talk. You don’t want to express 
your feelings or admit something is wrong.” 
—Kilroy
“When I first met with the group, guys 
would just sit there. They wouldn’t open 
up. So I opened myself up. I’d tell them, 
this is what’s been bothering me. Break 
the ice. Then someone else would talk 
about their experience.” 
—Kilroy
“It’s all right to show your emotions. It’s a 
natural thing to vent, to cry.” 
—Anonymous

Major depressive disorder. Everyone feels sad once 
in a while, but not everyone feels depressed. Symptoms 
include: 
• Feeling sad or uninterested in things most of the 
time. 
• Changes in eating and sleeping habits.
• Having low energy and/or a hard time focusing. 
• Feeling tearful, empty, or hopeless. 
• Feeling angry and irritable. 
• Feeling miserable but not understanding why.
• Having chronic pain, headaches, fatigue, or digestive 
issues.
Do these symptoms last for at least two weeks? Do 
they get in the way of your everyday life? You may be 
depressed. Talk therapy or medicine can help.
If you are severely depressed, you may also have 
thoughts of wanting to hurt yourself or die (this is a big 
concern for women who are recently released). Severe 
depression may also cause you to hear or see things that 
are not there. If you have these severe symptoms, go 
to the nearest emergency room right away or call the 
suicide and crisis lifeline: 988. 
Bipolar disorder. Most people have changes in mood 
at times. If you’re stressed, you might feel angry or 
scared. If you lost someone you love, you might feel sad. 
Hormone changes can also affect moods.
If you have intense mood swings that last for several 
days, you may have bipolar disorder. People with bipolar 
disorder have extreme shifts in mood, energy, and 
ability to function. These mood shifts include episodes of 
depression (above) and mania. Signs of mania are: 
• Increased self-esteem and feeling like you are on top 
of the world.
• Less need for sleep.
• Talking a lot and often fast.
• Having so many thoughts that you cannot keep up with 
them.
• Being distracted easily. 
• Feeling restless. You might pace the room or bounce your 
leg.
• Doing things that are risky and can cause harm: spending 
a lot of money, having unprotected sex with various 
partners, and using drugs or alcohol.
For some people, manic and depressive episodes can be 
very extreme. Symptoms can include seeing and hearing 
things that are not there. This can really impact your 
ability to function. If your symptoms are severe, get help 
right away. Less severe episodes of mania (known as 
hypomania) and depression may not impact your life as 
much. 
Managing bipolar disorder requires help from medicine 
and talk therapy. Keep a record of your mood changes 
so that you know if you need to seek help. 
Generalized anxiety disorder. Feeling anxious or 
stressed once in a while is a normal part of life. If your 
anxiety feels out of control, you might have an anxiety 
disorder. Generalized anxiety disorder is when you 
worry a lot and are nervous about everyday things, even 
things that you have no control over, for no apparent 
reason. You might feel like something really bad is going 
to happen. Anxiety leaves you feeling restless, tired, 
irritable, and tense. It can impact your ability to focus 
and sleep. 
If these problems do not go away and begin to impact 
your relationships and responsibilities, get help. Talk 
therapy can help. Medication can help when symptoms 
are severe.
Common Mental Health Issues
Several mental health issues are common in people who spend time in prison. We describe them here so that you can 
know what they are and when you may need to get help. If you think you might have one of these health issues, talk to a 
health professional who can evaluate you and provide a diagnosis. 
8 2
Schizophrenia. Some people can have a distorted 
sense of reality. This is known as schizophrenia. It is a 
severe mental health condition that requires medication 
to manage. Talk therapy can help you build life skills to 
cope. Schizophrenia involves a range of problems with 
thinking, behavior, and emotions. Signs of schizophrenia 
can vary, but it usually involves:
• Problems with thinking (having a hard time 
organizing your thoughts, forgetting things, not being 
able to focus, struggling to make decisions).
• Delusions (false beliefs that are not based in reality).
• Hallucinations (seeing or hearing things that aren’t 
really there). 
• Disorganized speech (not being able to put words or 
sentences together).
• Lacking skills that people usually have (the ability to 
express emotion, be part of activities, and engage 
with others) 
These symptoms can have a big impact on your life. If 
these symptoms are present for at least a month, get 
help.
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Some 
traumatic events are so shocking, scary, or dangerous 
that they can change the way we think and feel long 
after the event has passed. It’s natural to feel scared, 
nervous, or depressed after something bad has 
happened. If these feelings last for over a month, you 
may have post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Common symptoms of PTSD include:
• Having nightmares or flashbacks.
• Avoiding people or situations that remind you of the 
event. 
• Feeling on edge and anxious a lot.
• Feeling depressed.
• Trouble remembering things.
• Feeling emotionally detached. 
Medications and talk therapy can be useful in working 
through these symptoms.
Personality disorders. Your personality is the 
combination of characteristics or qualities that form 
your distinctive character. Sometimes people can 
develop personality disorders, which are patterns and 
traits that are harmful to themselves and others. For 
people in prison, the two most common personality 
disorders are:
• Borderline personality disorder: Having 
unstable moods, behavior, and relationships. Feeling 
emotionally unstable, worthless, insecure, or 
impulsive. These feelings or behaviors can hurt your 
relationships with others. 
• Antisocial personality disorder: Acting in ways 
that show a lack of care about other people. For 
example, lying, breaking laws, or acting impulsively. 
Not caring about your own safety or the safety of 
others.
Since personality traits are pretty stable over our 
lifetime, these disorders can be hard to treat. Despite 
that, it is not impossible. Often treatment includes longterm therapy. Medications tend to not work as well for 
these disorders.
Multiple disorders. Many people who are in prison 
have more than one mental health disorder. People 
who have depression are more likely to have anxiety, 
too. Many people who have a mental health disorder 
also have a substance use problem. Some people have 
a mental health disorder, a personality disorder, and a 
substance use disorder. 
If you have more than one of these disorders, let your 
providers know about everything you are struggling 
with. If you address one problem and not the other, you 
may find it difficult to fully recover.
“What I felt was most difficult when I first got out is figuring out how to relate to other people. 
You have both the lack of ‘normal’ experiences that most people have as late-teenagers and 
young adults. Plus you have the negative effects of long-term imprisonment.” 
—Greg A
