Getting Your ID

Congratulations, you’re out! Now that you’re free, you’ll 
need an ID. Hopefully, you already have your birth certificate 
and Social Security card. If not, here’s how you can get them:
• If you are able to, go in person to the county clerk’s office in 
the county where you were born to order a birth certificate. You 
can find addresses and phone numbers of county clerks offices in our 
directory. If you can’t go in person, call them or follow the instructions on 
their website to request a birth certificate. 
• Go to a Social Security Administration Office to get your Social Security card (see our directory). Call before you 
go to set up an appointment and find out what you need to bring. 

State ID or Driver’s License
Once you have your birth certificate and Social Security card, you can get a state ID or driver’s license. These are 
the most common forms of ID. To get either a state ID or a driver’s license, you’ll need to visit Driver Services. To 
find a Driver Services facility close to you, either call (800) 252-8980 or go to https://apps.ilsos.gov/facilityfinder/
facility.
Do you plan to get a driver’s license? Read the Illinois Rules of the Road first. You can pick up a copy of this booklet 
at any public library or download it at https://www.ilsos.gov/publications/pdf_publications/dsd_a112.pdf. If you’ve 
been incarcerated for a long time, we recommend getting a learner’s permit. A learner’s permit lets you practice 
driving until you feel comfortable taking the driver’s test. To get a permit, you will need to pass a written test and a 
vision test. Once you get the permit, you can drive with another driver who has a license.
Note: You can get a free state ID if you visit the DMV within 30 days of leaving prison. If you have a temporary 
ID from IDOC you have 90 days. You will need an Identification Card Verification Form from IDOC to get the free ID. 
This form can be requested from field services before you leave. 
Visiting Driver Services can take a long time, so be sure to bring everything you need:
• An original document with your written signature (credit card, court order, or Social Security card)
• An original document with your date of birth (birth certificate, passport, high school transcript, college 
transcript from classes you have taken at prison)
• An original document with your Social Security number (Social Security card, IL driver’s license record, 
or military service record)
• Original documents proving you live in Illinois (bank statement, credit report, utility bills, medical record, 
HIV test)
• Payment
3 4
“It took me seven months to get my Social Security card and ID; this time would have 
been cut in half if I would have been given the information shared here.”
—Antonio
Suspensions
Is your license suspended? A license can get suspended 
for many reasons:
• Not paying traffic tickets, parking tickets, or tolls.
• Driving while drunk or using drugs. This is called 
Driving Under the Influence, or a DUI.
• If you do not make child support payments. See 
our Legal Matters chapter for instructions on how 
to change your child support payments so that this 
doesn’t happen. 
• If your license was suspended, you can get it back 
after the suspension is over.
Revocations
Revoked means your driver’s license is taken away. 
Driver’s licenses are often revoked for more serious 
DUIs. For example, if someone was injured or killed 
because the driver was drunk or using drugs. If your 
license is revoked, you can get a new one. But you will 
have to wait for some time. The waiting periods for 
applying for a new license are: 
• 1st DUI offense: one year 
• 2nd DUI offense: five years 
• 3rd DUI offense: ten years 
• 4th DUI offense: life-time ban
If your license was revoked because someone was killed 
while you were driving, you may not be able to get a new 
one. But you should still check to be sure.
If you choose to drive without a license, you may 
face more serious penalties (more time without a license, 
jail time, car seizure).
Getting Your License Back
How do you get your license back if it was suspended? 
First, contact Driver Services. Ask them how long before 
you can apply for a new license. Instructions on how to 
see your driving record can be found on the Illinois DMV 
website at https://www.ilsos.gov/departments/drivers/
drivers_license/purchaseabstract.html.
You can also ask to meet with a hearing officer at a 
DMV office. Locations and phone numbers can be found 
here: https://www.ilsos.gov/facilities/facilitylist.html
The hearing officer will let you know if you can get your 
license back. They can also help you get ready for your 
hearing. 
Informal Hearing Process
You can schedule an informal hearing if you have only 
one DUI and if that DUI is not a criminal DUI. Contact 
the Driver Services office nearest you. During the 
hearing, an officer will tell you what you need to do to 
get your license back. You will probably need to: 
“Make appointments for anything and 
everything. Don’t wait until you have 
all the requirements in your hand. Just 
make the appointment. You can always 
reschedule if you need to.” 
—Roberto
Mapping Your Future 2023 3 5
After You Get Out
• Pay a fee and any traffic or parking tickets you 
haven’t paid for yet.
• If your license was suspended or revoked because of 
a DUI, you will need: 
○ A Drug/Alcohol Evaluation by a licensed agency. 
○ Papers showing that you have completed a DUI 
Risk Education Course. 
○ Papers showing that you have completed 
substance abuse treatment. 
• If your license was suspended because you did not 
pay child support, you will need papers showing that 
you have changed your child support payment plan 
to one you can afford, and that the court agrees to 
these changes. See our Legal Matters chapter. 
Formal Hearing Process
A formal hearing is stricter than an informal hearing. 
If you have multiple DUIs or a criminal DUI, you will 
need to schedule a formal hearing. This kind of hearing 
may include witnesses and evidence. To request a formal 
hearing: 
1. Complete the Form DAH H12 https://www.ilsos.gov/
publications/pdf_publications/dah_h12.pdf
2. Mail the form to the nearest Driver Services office. 
3. Pay a $50 fee.
At the hearing, a Driver Services hearing officer will 
decide about your license. They may say you can get 
a new license. They may give you a temporary driving 
permit, or they may deny you a license. It is a good idea 
to bring documents to show you are a safe driver who 
won’t get another DUI. You can also bring witnesses 
to talk about how you are safe, trustworthy, and 
responsible. Some people hire lawyers. 
Do you need a license to get to work or school? Bring 
papers that show that you have a job or take classes. 
This may help you get a temporary driving permit.
Chicago CityKey Card
If you live in Chicago, you may be able to get a Chicago 
CityKey card. This is an ID card for all Chicago 
residents, including people who are undocumented. It is 
easier to get than a state ID. The CityKey card is also 
a library card, transit card, and gets you discounts at 
some businesses and cultural sites in Chicago. The card 
also gives you discounts on medications. You can’t use 
the card to open a bank account, but you can use it as 
an ID for a lot of basic things. For more information 
visit the City Clerk of Chicago’s website at https://www.
chicityclerk.com/about-citykey
“If you go with the frame of mind that 
you are going to spend a hell of a lot of 
time in that place, it helps. Go with the 
right frame of mind, otherwise you’re 
going to be miserable.” 
—Anonymous
3 6
Selective Service
Did you know you may still have to sign up for “the draft”? 
The draft is called the Selective Service. It is a program 
that lets the US military call men to serve in the military. 
You need to register for Selective Service if you are: 
• Male
• Between 18-25
• Are a US citizen or an immigrant
Registering with the Selective Service does not mean 
you are in the military. It means you may be called to 
the military if there is a crisis. 
If you are 18-25 you need to register for the Selective 
Service right away. If you don’t, you could be fined or go 
to jail. You also cannot get a job with the government or 
get government training. You can register online at sss.
gov/register/. You can send the form by mail to: 
Selective Service System
Registration Information Office
PO Box 94739
Palatine, IL 60094-4739
You don’t have to register if you were incarcerated the 
entire time you were 18 to 25. You will need to request a 
status information letter at https://www.sss.gov/verify/
sil/.
What if you weren’t incarcerated but you still didn’t 
register? You can also request a status information 
letter. The letter should say that you did not “knowingly 
or willfully” fail to register for Selective Service. You 
could mention if you were incarcerated shortly after 
your 18th birthday, left school early, or any other things 
that might have made it hard to register.
You can get marriage licenses and divorce decrees 
at the county clerk’s office in which you were married or 
divorced.